New Tutorial: Understanding the Yellow Paper's EVM Specifications (#6178)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/developers/tutorials/yellow-paper-evm/index.md

---
title: Understanding the Yellow Paper's EVM Specifications

> description: Understanding the part of the Yellow Paper, the formal specifications for Ethereum, that explains the ethereum virtual machine (EVM).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Understanding the part of the Yellow Paper, the formal specifications for Ethereum, that explains the Ethereum virtual machine (EVM).
```

author: "qbzzt"
tags: ["evm", "yellow paper", "specifications"]
skill: intermediate
lang: en
sidebar: true
published: 2022-05-15
---

> [The Yellow Paper](https://ethereum.github.io/yellowpaper/paper.pdf) is the formal specifications for Ethereum. 

Reviewer 2: > The Yellow Paper is the formal specifications for Ethereum

Reads a bit weird IMO - should "specifications" be plural? 

I'd suggest either:

> The Yellow Paper is the formal specification for Ethereum

Or 

> The Yellow Paper contains the formal specifications for Ethereum

Except where amended by [the EIP process](/eips/), it contains the exact description of how everything works.
It is written as a mathematical paper, which includes terminology programmers may not be familiar with. 
In this paper you learn how to read it, and by extension other related mathematical papers.

> ## Which Yellow Paper?

Author: Are you sure we still need those? If you look at https://ethereum.org/en/developers/tutorials/short-abi/#testjs-testjs, for example, the `{#<tag name>}` is not hidden and causes the heading to essentially appear twice.

> ## Which Yellow Paper?

Reviewer: Yup, they're definitely needed. The short-abi page has a bug caused by using a period in header id.

> Like almost everything else in Ethereum, the Yellow Paper evolves over time. 
> To be able to refer to a specific version, I uploaded [the current version at writing](yellow-paper-berlin.pdf).
> The section, page, and equation numbers I use will refer to that version.
> It is a good idea to have it open in a different window while reading this document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like almost everything else in Ethereum, the Yellow Paper evolves over time. To be able to refer to a specific version, I uploaded [the current version at writing](yellow-paper-berlin.pdf). The section, page, and equation numbers I use will refer to that version. It is a good idea to have it open in a different window while reading this document.
```

### Why the EVM?

I am writing this a few months before [the merge](/upgrades/merge). 
That event will significantly change the way blocks are handled, making that part of the current yellow paper of mostly historical instance.
On the other hand, the EVM is mostly unaffected by the merge.

## 9 (Execution Model)

This section (p. 12-14) includes most of the definition of the EVM.

The term *system state* includes everything you need to know about the system to run it.
In a normal computer this means the memory, content of registers, etc.

A [Turing machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_machine) is a computational model.
Essentially, it is a simplified version of a computer, which is proved to have the same ability to run computations that a normal computer can (everything that a computer can calculate a Turing machine can calculate and vice versa).
This model makes it easier to prove various theorems about what is and what isn't comnputable.

The term [Turing-complete](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_completeness) means a computer that can run the same calculations as a Turing machine. 

> Turing machines can get into infinite loops, and the EVM cannot because it would run out of gas, so it's only quasi-Turing-complete.

Author: It is true. The white paper specifically calls it `quasi-Turing-complete`.

   
   We still need to decipher the expression *⌈μ<sub>s</sub>[2]÷32⌉*. 
   The outmost part, *⌈ \<value\> ⌉* is the ceiling function, a function that given a value returns the smallest integer that is still not smaller than the value. 
   For example, *⌈2.5⌉ = ⌈3⌉ = 3*. 
   The inner part is *μ<sub>s</sub>[2]÷32*. 
   Looking at section 3 (Conventions) on p. 3, *μ* is the machine state.
   The machine state is defined in section 9.4.1 on p. 13.
   According to that section, one of the machine state parameters is *s* for the stack.
   Putting it all together, it seems that *μ<sub>s</sub>[2]* is location #2 in the stack.
   Looking at [the opcode](https://www.evm.codes/#37), location #2 in the stack is the size of the data in bytes.
   Looking at the other opcodes in group W<sub>copy</sub>, [`CODECOPY`](https://www.evm.codes/#39) and [`RETURNDATACOPY`](https://www.evm.codes/#3e), they also have a size of data in the same location.
   So *⌈μ<sub>s</sub>[2]÷32⌉* is the number of 32 byte words required to store the data being copied.
   Putting everything together, the inherent cost of [`CALLDATACOPY`](https://www.evm.codes/#37) is 3 gas plus 3 per word of data being copied.

> 1. The cost of running the code we're calling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Running cost {#running-cost}

The cost of running the code we're calling.

```

1. The cost of expanding memory (if necessary). 
   In equation 324, this value is written as *C<sub>mem</sub>(μ<sub>i</sub>')-C<sub>mem</sub>(μ<sub>i</sub>)*.
   Looking at section 9.4.1 again, we see that *μ<sub>i</sub>* is the number of words in memory. 
   So *μ<sub>i</sub>* is the number of words in memory before the opcode and *μ<sub>i</sub>'* is the number of words in memory after the opcode. 
   
   The function *C<sub>mem</sub>* is defined in equation 326: *C<sub>mem</sub>(a) = G<sub>memory</sub> × a + ⌊a<sup>2</sup> ÷ 512⌋*. 
   *⌊x⌋* is the floor function, a function that given a value returns the largest integer that is still not larger than the value. 
   For example, *⌊2.5⌋ = ⌊2⌋ = 2.*
   When *a < √512*, *a<sup>2</sup> < 512*, and the result of the floor function is zero.
   So for the first 22 words (704 bytes), the cost rises linearly with the number of memory words required.
   Beyond that point *⌊a<sup>2</sup> ÷ 512⌋* is positive.
   When the memory required is high enough the gas cost is proportional to the square of the amount of memory.
   
   

> ## 9.3 (Execution Environment)   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 9.3 (Execution Environment) {#execution-environment}
```

| *I<sub>s</sub>* |  [`CALLER`](https://www.evm.codes/#33)  | `msg.sender`
| *I<sub>v</sub>* |  [`CALLVALUE`](https://www.evm.codes/#34)  | `msg.value`
| *I<sub>b</sub>* |  [`CODECOPY`](https://www.evm.codes/#39)  | `address(this).code`
| *I<sub>H</sub>* |  Block header fields, such as [`NUMBER`](https://www.evm.codes/#43) and [`DIFFICULTY`](https://www.evm.codes/#44)  | `block.number`, `block.difficulty`, etc.
| *I<sub>e</sub>* |  Depth of the call stack for calls between contracts (including contract creation)
| *I<sub>w</sub>* |  Is the EVM allowed to change state, or is it running statically

A few other parameters are necessary to understand the rest of section 9:

| Parameter | Defined in section | Meaning |
| --- | - | - |
| *σ* |  2 (p. 2, equation 1) | The state of the blockchain 
| *g* | 9.3 (p. 13)           | Remaining gas
| *A* | 6.1 (p. 8)            | Accrued substate (changes scheduled for when the transaction ends)
| *o* | 9.3 (p. 13)           | Output - the returned result in the case of internal transaction (when one contract calls another) and calls to view functions (when you are just asking for information, so there is no need to wait for a transaction)

> ## 9.4 (Execution Overview) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 9.4 (Execution Overview) {#execution-overview}
```

Now that have all the preliminaries, we can finally start working on how the EVM works.

Equations 137-142 give us the initial conditions for running the EVM:

| Symbol | Initial value | Meaning |
| - | - | - |
| *μ<sub>g</sub>*  | *g* | Gas remaining
| *μ<sub>pc</sub>* | *0* | Program counter, the address of the next instruction to execute
| *μ<sub>m</sub>*  | *(0, 0, ...)* | Memory, initialized to all zeros 
| *μ<sub>i</sub>*  | *0* | Highest memory location used 
| *μ<sub>s</sub>*  | *()* | The stack, initially empty
| *μ<sub>o</sub>*  | *∅*  | The output, empty set until and unless we stop either with return data ([`RETURN`](https://www.evm.codes/#f3) or [`REVERT`](https://www.evm.codes/#fd)) or without it ([`STOP`](https://www.evm.codes/#00) or [`SELFDESTRUCT`](https://www.evm.codes/#ff)). 
 
 
Equation 143 tells us there are four possible conditions at each point in time during execution, and what to do with them:

> 1. If *Z(σ,μ,A,I)*, it means that we have encountered an abnormal condition.
>    In that case the new state is identical to the old one (except gas gets burned)
> 1. If the opcode is [`REVERT`](https://www.evm.codes/#fd), the new state is the same as the old state, some gas is lost, and we have output to return.
> 1. If there is any output, (meaning we are at a [`RETURN`](https://www.evm.codes/#f3)), the state is the new state and return the output.
> 1. If we aren't at one of the end conditions, continue running.

Reviewer: Reminder to please use explicit numbering for lists in markdown on ethereum.org :-) the items are pulled out of context during translation and everything getting numbered '1' can be quite confusing for translators

```suggestion
1. If *Z(σ,μ,A,I)*, it means that we have encountered an abnormal condition.
   In that case, the new state is identical to the old one (except gas gets burned)
2. If the opcode is [`REVERT`](https://www.evm.codes/#fd), the new state is the same as the old state, some gas is lost, and we have output to return.
3. If there is any output, (meaning we are at a [`RETURN`](https://www.evm.codes/#f3)), the state is the new state and returns the output.
4. If we aren't at one of the end conditions, continue running.
```

> ## 9.4.1 (Machine State)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 9.4.1 (Machine State) {#machine-state}
```

This section explains the machine state in greater detail.
It specifies that *w* is the current opcode. 
If *μ<sub>pc</sub>* is less than *||I<sub>b</sub>||*, the length of the code, then that byte (*I<sub>b</sub>[μ<sub>pc</sub>]*) is the opcode.
Otherwise, the opcode is defined as [`STOP`](https://www.evm.codes/#00).

As this is a [stack machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stack_machine), we need to keep track of the number of items popped out (*δ*) and pushed in (*α*) by each opcode.

> ## 9.4.2 (Exceptional Halting)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 9.4.2 (Exceptional Halting) {#exceptional-halting}
```

  If so, and we're trying a state changing operation, it can't happen.
  
  The function *W(w,μ)* is defined later in equation 150.
  *W(w,μ)* is true if one of these conditions is true: 
  - ***w ∈ {CREATE, CREATE2, SSTORE, SELFDESTRUCT}***
  
    These opcodes change the state, either by creating a new contract, storing a value, or destroying the current contract.
  
  
  - ***LOG0≤w ∧ w≤LOG4***

    If we are called statically we cannot emit log entries.
    The log opcodes are all in the range between [`LOG0` (A0)](https://www.evm.codes/#a0) and [`LOG4` (A4)](https://www.evm.codes/#a4).
    The number after the log opcode specifies how many topics the log entry contains.
    
  - ***w=CALL ∧ μ<sub>s</sub>[2]≠0***

    You can call another contract when you're static, but if you do you cannot transfer ETH to it. 
    

- ***w = SSTORE ∧ μ<sub>g</sub> ≤ G<sub>callstipend</sub>***

  You cannot run [`SSTORE`](https://www.evm.codes/#55) unless you have more than G<sub>callstipend</sub> (defined as 2300 in Appendix G) gas.

> ## 9.4.3 (Jump Destination Validity)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 9.4.3 (Jump Destination Validity) {#jump-destination-validity}
```

For [`PUSH1`](https://www.evm.codes/#60) we need to advance by two bytes (the PUSH itself and the one byte value), for [`PUSH2`](https://www.evm.codes/#61) we need to advance by three bytes because it's a two byte value, etc.
All other EVM opcodes are just one byte long, so in all other cases *N(i,w)=i+1*.

This function is used in equation (152) to define *D<sub>J</sub>(c,i)*, which is the [set](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Set_(mathematics)) of all valid jump destinations in code *c*, starting with opcode location *i*. 
This function is defined recursively. 
If *i≥||c||*, that means that we're at or after the end of the code. 
We are not going to find any more jump destinations, so just return the empty set.

In all other cases we look at the rest of the code by going to the next opcode and getting the set starting from it.
*c[i]* is the current opcode, so *N(i,c[i])* is the location of the next opcode.
*D<sub>J</sub>(c,N(i,c[i]))* is therefore the set of valid jump destinations that starts at the next opcode.
If the current opcode isn't a `JUMPDEST`, just return that set.
If it is `JUMPDEST`, include it in the result set and return that.

> ## 9.4.4 (Normal Halting)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 9.4.4 (Normal Halting) {#normal-halting}
```

The halting function *H*, can return three types of values.

- If we aren't in a halt opcode, return *∅*, the empty set. 
  By convention, this value is interpreted as Boolean false.
  
- If we have a halt opcode that doesn't produce output (either [`STOP`](https://www.evm.codes/#00) or [`SELFDESTRUCT`](https://www.evm.codes/#ff)), return a sequence of size zero bytes as the return value.
  Note that this is very different from the empty set.
  This value means that the EVM really did halt, just there's no return data to read.
  
- If we have a halt opcode that does produce output (either [`RETURN`](https://www.evm.codes/#f3) or [`REVERT`](https://www.evm.codes/#fd)), return the sequence of bytes specified by that opcode.
  This sequence is taken from memory, the value at the top of the stack (*μ<sub>s</sub>[0]*) is the first byte, and the value after it (*μ<sub>s</sub>[1]*) is the length.
  

> ## H.2 (Instruction Set)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## H.2 (Instruction Set) {#instruction-set}
```

You can see the list of account information fields in section 4.1 on p. 4. 

The second equation, *A'<sub>a</sub> ≡ A<sub>a</sub> ∪ {μ<sub>s</sub>[0] mod 2<sup>160</sup>}*, is related to the difference in cost between access to warm storage (storage that has recently been accessed and is likely to be cached) and cold storage (storage that hasn't been accessed and is likely to be in slower storage that is more expensive to retrieve). 
*A<sub>a</sub>* is the list of addresses previously accessed by the transaction, which should therefore be cheaper to access, as defined in section 6.1 on p. 8.
You can read more about this subject in [EIP-2929](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2929).

| Value | Mnemonic  | δ  | α  | Description |
| ----: | --------- | -- | -- | ----------- |
| 0x8F  | DUP16     | 16 | 17 | Duplicate 16th stack item.
||||| *μ′<sub>s</sub>[0] ≡ μ<sub>s</sub>[15]*

Note that to use any stack item, we need to pop it, which means we also need to pop all the stack items on top of it.
In the case of [`DUP<n>`](https://www.evm.codes/#8f) and [`SWAP<n>`](https://www.evm.codes/#9f), this means having to pop and then push up to sixteen values.

> ## 9.5 (The Execution Cycle)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 9.5 (The Execution Cycle) {#execution-cycle}
```

> Now that we have all the parts, we can finally undertand how the execution cycle of the EVM is documented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have all the parts, we can finally understand how the execution cycle of the EVM is documented.
```

Equation (155) says that given the state:

- *σ* (global blockchain state) 
- *μ* (EVM state)
- *A* (substate, changes to happen when the transaction ends)
- *I* (execution environment)

The new state is *(σ', μ', A', I')*.

Equations (156)-(158) define the stack and the change in it due to an opcode (*μ<sub>s</sub>*). 
Equation (159) is the change in gas (*μ<sub>g</sub>*). 
Equation (160) is the change in the program counter (*μ<sub>pc</sub>*).
Finally, equations (161)-(164) specify that the other parameters stay the same, unless explicitly changed by the opcode.

With this the EVM is fully defined.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Conclusion {#conclusion}
```

> Mathematical notation is precise, and has allowed the Yellow Paper to specify every detail of Ethereum.
> However, it does have some drawbacks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mathematical notation is precise and has allowed the Yellow Paper to specify every detail of Ethereum. However, it does have some drawbacks:
```

> - It can only be understood by humans, which means that [compliance tests](https://github.com/ethereum/tests) have to be written manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It can only be understood by humans, which means that [compliance tests](https://github.com/ethereum/tests) must be written manually.
```

- Programmers understand computer code.
  They may or may not understand mathematical notation.
  

> Maybe for these reasons, the newer [consensus layer specs](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/tests/core/pyspec/README.md) are written in Python.
> However, until and unless the Yellow Paper is also translated to Python or a similar language, the Yellow Paper will continue in service and it is useful to be able to read it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maybe for these reasons, the newer [consensus layer specs](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/tests/core/pyspec/README.md) are written in Python.
However, until and unless the Yellow Paper is also translated to Python or a similar language, the Yellow Paper will continue in service, and it is helpful to be able to read it.
```
